# craftsmanship

Something I have learned about my taste is that it revolves around a supreme respect for workmanship. This probably stems from my conception of myself as impatient. My dad, Zen carpenter, is able to make beautiful objects almost exactly to the specifications that he perceives in his mind’s eye before their physical creation. I think of him as a multifarious sculptor-- wood, metal, or idea (perhaps our most fecund medium). It always seems to come back to sculpture, and I think this recurrence has to do with the Lucretian outlook: if everything is made of inseparable units, then the motion/settling and combination/separation of those units is a type of sculpture, reality as a sand castle. 

Craftsmanship, to me, is the idea of an investment of thought, a frugal, but not stingy, expenditure of idea as a resource. Thought and time, perhaps our two most important resources of all, perhaps the same thing said two ways. Watching my father fill the yellow pages of legal pads with drawings, then move to pages upon pages of taupe tracing paper, and finally to a layered vision of his concept rendered in two dimensions for a three dimensional mind: magic. All thought, pure idea with a dash of graphite. 

Then the time. Hours in the shop— cutting, sanding, recutting, sanding, sanding, sanding, planing, sanding, fixturing, glueing, sanding, lacquering, admiring. The smell of sawdust and oil-based, of warm mahogany and the fizz of a cold Diet Coke, of those dreadful Marlboro 100s. Crickets chirping against the buzz of fluorescent lights. My father has made countless pieces of furniture, and I wonder how much each one represents his emotional state, or how to measure this? Ask him? I think of certain black wardrobe where we used to keep all of our extra electronics cables and video game components. The piece is a deep ebony with a glass top, curving sideboards and delicately trimmed doors. The knobs and handles are matched to the style of the cabinet, perfectly proportioned to match the size of its curved feet. 

I recently overheard a conversation between two academics comparing Byron and Pope. One argued that Byron’s poetry contained more emotion, more humanity. The other responded that the first was reading Pope too quickly, that his poetry was slow (poetry is always slower than prose), slower than Byron, slower than any other poet’s work. How can you read a sculpture slowly, when there feels like there isn’t enough time? I might regret not spending more time with my father. But what is regret when everything is a sculpture? When we are all just sand castles on the same beach? I can think of his beautiful benches, recall every knot in their tops (he loves knotted wood, something about highlighting imperfection), but I can’t recall his face as well. Parts of it, his knots, but not the thing in its entirety. I can think of his little short hairs on his head, unshaven and misplaced. I can’t think of his whole face, only pieces. 

Often we talk about “the bigger picture”— zooming out to have a macroscopic view. But we can’t have this, and if we can, it is only a imaginative image for ourselves and for no one else. Understanding happens piecemeal, and things build. It is better, I think, to understand our pieces individually and their connections than to understand the puzzle. Compassion must come when we can love these people, these things, even these ideas and imaginative visions. Matthieu Ricard speaks about the brain/mind almost as a muscle: “We wake up in the morning and exercise our bodies for fitness, but what about our minds? Would we expect to learn piano by sitting in front of it for 20 seconds every other week? No! Then how can we expect to be compassionate without practice?” 

Is this the craftsmanship I’m talking about? The workmanship I aspire to? This practice seems, to me, to be the only way we can live. We can absorb this understanding of experience as a craft, as practice. We can sculpt our minds and our micro-worlds knowing that it will take cutting and gluing and sanding and shaping and sanding and cutting and… 