#Dear Professor Milosz

I imagine your first lover, Warsaw, her mouth still as sweet as that first kiss, now with a story as hard as stone rubble, the traces of fresh cracks worn over time by the rain and snow. How does it feel to move between worlds? Your new lover is the fortunate sun, her mouth sweeter and warmer but... not the same. Every time you kiss her, you feel a dampness reminding you of the shallow streams- where you bathed. Adrienne says our poetry cannot stand outside history, she says my words are the immaculately conceived children of modernism- your children. Your new girl was a sophomore, but even then her verse rolled off the tongue- she put your words in her mouth. She was your best student. And your old beloved, do you see her anymore? You think of her every time you see the word grey or the color blue- she isn't one of the dead ones, you wouldn't leave her little gifts anymore. What are nations when you are the gull, screaming from innumerable graves? What are nations when we fly faster than the gull? I think about your flock when you (poof!) disappeared in a pile of feathers. An American actor is filming a commercial in Tokyo, he meets a young American woman, they fall into some sort of love. Two Americans colliding in Tokyo inside a steel-glass sky- you were in some sort of world, too, in some sort of love, but you had a responsibility that I can't understand. Post-post. Post-line, post-postbox, flat sheets sliding down big hills, flying through obsolete toll booths. Erase the map's lines, fly west where our fortunate sun goes to die. How can we be living inside little circles drawn in blue chalk on the sidewalk or big circles in ink when you've told us, rightfully, the hardest part is to be one person. They always say: "Come, come in, there's more room inside. I'll stand for you. Sit." Besides, the waters have risen and we have all fallen from our father's graces. We know this. We lie. We lie often. We lie on our backs in the parks and no one turns anyone away- we all watch the films together now. Now the sophomore girls write the really impressive verse- we all stare at her pages because she is more free than you could have ever known- she flies around the world every day and comes back to the same point every time. This film isn't a judgment of Eros, Professor, quite the opposite- an allegory for its reinvigoration- subversion of the delineator. You said it yourself, in so many words, a lifetime of words. Uncle Walt never said I, but not because he belonged to America, because his demon never left his side (it lived in his beard). Lawrence's slithered in and out of the hole in his wall. Yours must perch hidden in those raven wings over your eyes. Now I see you sitting, laughing, knowing that I'll never see the shallow streams of Poland like you did, that I'll never have love like you had. What do you do with your coat when you move to Paradise? Its storm blows east, its wind carried you, your wings unclosed, west. Does it hang on a hook with dirty pockets filling to the brim with dutiful poems? Poems that sit crumpled, ready to unfurl when the time is right? You're right, sir: it is neither a collection of words that I can sprinkle onto the board to count my points nor the songs of drunkards. However, my demon left- a sad day. He's looking for work in Berkeley.

Love,

Spencer