#geoff 

There aren't many people that I can confidently say I'm a true fan of. A true fan: I see no fault in what they do, how they work, what they produce. I'm a true fan of Geoff Dyer. Eugenie sent me a book, Out of Sheer Rage, for Christmas 2016. Since, I've read almost every word he's published, and still drop by his website regularly to find out when the next book will be out (April 2018). I've unashamedly described him as a "writer's writer" to friends, a title reserved, typically, for use by snobs to describe other, more famous, snobs-- Aronofsky is a filmmaker's filmmaker, Loudon Wainwright III a songwriter's songwriter. People you want to keep under wraps, who you imagine creating just for you. Perhaps that's it-- the intimacy of their creation, the personality. At any rate, Geoff is an idol for me. He's not unlike Sebald (another writer's writer)-- when asked what categories his books should be marketed under Max replied, "all of them?". Sebald is a travel writing memoirist nonfiction author. He puts whatever he feels like should be in his books, whether its the description of a certain type of grasses found in the Southern Peak District or an itemized list of all the Egyptian scribes known to exist within a certain two-year period. Geoff writes about whatever he wants to write about, but his three categories might be: travel, criticism, memoir-- but not in that order. I would like to read every word he's written again to get a true sense of the mechanics of his writing. The point of that exercise is to change one of his categories, or at least add one-- science. I want to do what Sebald and Geoff have done for travel writing / nonfiction for science writing. I want to know nothing about science writing (not unlike Geoff's position before writing But Beautiful with regard to music writing) and write the most entertaining popular science books imaginable. They will mix memoir and literature and nonfiction, whatever interests me or I recall during the process, with an understanding of hard science and my own theoretical leaps. This, I think, is the best way to enjoy the writing process (write what you know), while working on my personal project of understanding how life and the universe works. If Geoff thinks that art is the highest human form, perhaps I think science and engineering are instead. Or both. Or neither. We'll see. 

17/1/18 