---
layout: post
title:  ""
date:   2018-04-29
categories: weeklies
---

Carver Mead on [where innovation comes from](https://www.technologyreview.com/s/403027/carver-meads-natural-inspiration/)

>To understand reality, you have to understand how things work. If you do that, you can start to do engineering with it, build things. And if you can’t, whatever you’re doing probably isn’t good science. To me, engineering and science aren’t separate endeavors. It’s like, “Are you a husband or a father?”

<br><br>

feedback, oscillations, moods

<br><br>

what are fast-twitch and slow-twitch muscles? 

<br><br>

explaining relativity like a race track 

<br><br>

Stil thinking about this Atlantic piece 

>Libraries might seem fated to become the civic counterparts of yesteryear’s Borders or Barnes & Noble, but in nearly every city we visited they were newly prominent. By most measures of use—classes and programs offered, daily attendance, visits to the website, everything except calls to reference librarians for the research people can now do on Google—libraries are becoming more rather than less popular and central to civic life. The soft measures of impact are powerful: Walk into a random public library, and you’ll see waiting lines for computers, librarians helping with job searches or other practical concerns, desk space for young entrepreneurs. According to a recent Pew survey, Millennials use libraries more than their Gen X or Boomer elders do.

>Dysfunction at the national level genuinely is a problem, as the world is reminded every time the federal government shuts down. Some of that pathology has spread to the state level. But for us the American story was of a country that is still capable of functioning far more effectively than national-level paralysis would indicate or than most people unaware of the national patterns we are reporting would assume about the parts of America they’re not in.

>connections, engagement, perception

Manufacturing, Schools, Talent Dispersal, Immigration, Civic Governance, Conservation, Downtowns 

>Early in our travels I received a note from a young man who had moved from a big coastal city to a town in North Texas. “If you want to consume a fabulous community, you could move to some place like Brooklyn,” he said—or San Francisco, or Seattle, or Paris, or Amsterdam, or any other glittering site with restaurants, parks, vistas, and public spaces to enjoy. “If you want to create a great community, you move someplace that needs your help,” like his new hometown. Creating in this sense means taking responsibility for the invention and sustenance of the community in which you’d like to live. 


<br><br>

control and self-control 

self = control, control = oppression. liberation is liberating consciousness from the self as much as it is liberating the self from the oppressor 

control v agency 
control v freedom
control v action 
control v coercion 
control v influence 
control v nudging 

what are the normative conclusions— how does this understanding of control in the brain and out of it influence our decision-making, policy, education, 

<br><br>

there are different levels to our experience 

one one level, the most fundamental, there’s the physical, deterministic structure of the universe
on that same level is what Spira calls Consciousness, Awareness, what Spinoza calls Nature 

pieces of this world enter our minds through perception (like a tiny flashlight in a pitch-black forest)
in our minds we (the dream itself) expand these perceptions into a dream
but finite mind cannot know the infinite, so this expansion is only seemingly infinite 

only by changing the World, transforming it in time, we can experience the “new”, the new cannot arise from our minds

<br><br>

where did deleuze leave off? 

	technology 
	neuroscience 

<br><br>

reification 

In Marxism, reification is the process by which social relations are perceived as inherent attributes of the people involved in them, or attributes of some product of the relation, such as a traded commodity. This implies that objects are transformed into subjects and subjects are turned into objects

Reification (also known as concretism, hypostatization, or the fallacy of misplaced concreteness) is a fallacy of ambiguity, when an abstraction (abstract belief or hypothetical construct) is treated as if it were a concrete real event or physical entity.

<br><br>

I get worried still about a real job. This is a real job, what I’m doing. The thing is, I have to take it as one. I have to build myself into a product that can be publicly traded on the marketplace. 

If the mental is material, then this material will have to exist as a product of labor. Dualism is the insecurity with trading our materiality of mind in a free market. 

This doesn’t mean I shouldn’t invest, that I shouldn’t take part in the 

Programming’s “don’t repeat yourself” is very different than the way humans learn and think and exists with each other. The modularity and strict abstraction is not the way that we think, though it may be the way we’re taught to think. Should we think about how to make programming more human? 

<br><br>
