
---
layout: post
title:  "Week 1 PHIL2034"
date:   2018-04-29
categories: philosophy
---

# Week 1 

“Invention of the Mind” (Rorty 1979) 

universals and particulars are cut as mental and physical

wittgenstein— universals are contextual, within the language game

neural correlations could give us thoughts, mental images, etc
	the hard problems is the particular one— one are YOUR feelings like?
	to solve it is usually to create a bugbear-- to swap brains, etc 

even if neural correlations didn’t work, why make immaterial things?

the ontological gap is actually an epistemic privilege problem 
	YOUR thoughts are incorrigible, undoubtable 
	(cool connection wth skepticism here, solipsism) 

Rorty tries to understand why we have a mind-body problem, tracing the "problem" through from the ancients to contemporary neo-dualist arguments. 

>So when Ryle suggests that to talk of mental entities is to talk of dispositions to behave, or when Smart suggests that it is to talk of neural states, they have two strikes against them. For why, if anything like behaviorism or materialism is true, should there be anything like this intuitive distinction?

>Wittgenstein and Strawson that in some sense there is nothing there but the human organism, and that we must give up the notion of this organism as made out of a bit of _res cogitans_ nonspatially associated with a bit of _res extensa_. But, they say, no scientiﬁc discovery can reveal an identity This intuition seems to them enough to establish an unbridgeable gap.

>In this situation, it is tempting for the dualist to go linguistic and begin talking about “different vocabularies” or “alternative descriptions.” [e.g. Spinoza's double-aspect theory] The question “two descriptions of what?” makes this a difﬁcult position to hold onto.

>We have the following dilemma: either neo-dualists must construct an epistemological account of how we know a priori that entities fall under two irreducibly distinct ontological species, or else they must ﬁnd some way of expressing their dualism which relies on neither the notion of “ontological gap" nor that of “alternative description."

>We feel vaguely conﬁdent that if the inﬁnite could exist, it, like the universal, could only be exempliﬁed by the immaterial. If it makes any sense to speak of the existence of universals, it would seem that they must exist immaterially, and that is why they can never be identiﬁed with spatio—temporal particulars. [...] Nevertheless the opposite of “mental” is “physical” and the opposite of “immaterial” is “material.” “Physical” and “material” seem synonymous. How can two distinct concepts have synonymous opposites?

What is spatiotemporal? Why is it useful? What is a spatial or non-spatial state? Freeze time, we say, and they analyze the spatial structure, like in a photograph. But a photograph is dependent on time. It is useful only because of this time instant relative to other time instants, in a time-context. This might be what Deleuze is talking about with _movement-image_ and _time-image_. 

>We are not entitled to begin talking about the mind-body problem, or about the possible identity or necessary non-identity of mental and physical states, without ﬁrst asking what we mean by “mental.” I would hope further to have incited the suspicion that our soocalled intuition about what is mental may be merely our readiness to fall in with a speciﬁcally philosophical language-game. I think that this socalled intuition is no more than the ability to command a certain technical vocabulary—one which has no use outside of philosophy books and which links up with no issues in daily life, empirical science, morals, or religion.

>To say that we cannot observe intentional properties by looking at the brain is like saying that we cannot see a proposition when we look at a Mayan codex—we simply do not know what to look for, because we do not yet know how to relate what we see to a symbolsystem. The relation between an inscription—on paper or, given the hypothesized concomitance, in the brain—and what it means is no more mysterious than the relation between a functional state of a person, such as his beauty or his health, and the parts of his body. It is just those parts seen in a given context. So the answer to the question “Why is the intentional nonmaterial?” is “because any functional state—any state which can only be grasped by relating what is observed to a larger context—is, in a trivial sense, nonmaterial.” The problem is in trying to relate this trivial notion of being “nonmaterial”—which means merely something like “not immediately evident to all who look”—with the philosophically pregnant sense of “immateriality.” 

>To put it another way, why should we be troubled by Leibniz’s point that if the brain were blown up to the size of a factory, so that we could stroll through it, we should not see thoughts? If we know enough neural correlations, we shall indeed see thoughts—in the sense that our vision will reveal to us what thoughts the possessor of the brain is having. If we do not, we shall not, but then if we stroll through any factory without having ﬁrst learned about its parts and their relations to one another, we shall not see 'what is going on. Further, even if we could ﬁnd no such neural correlations, even if cerebral localization of thoughts was a complete failure, why would we want to say that a person’s thoughts or mental images were nonphysical simply because we cannot give an account of them in terms of his parts? To use an example from Hilary Putnam, one cannot give an account of why square pegs do not ﬁt into round holes in terms of the elementary particles which constitute the peg and the hole, but nobody ﬁnds a perplexing ontological gap between macrostructure and microstructure.

>Why do some neo-dualist philosophers say that how something feels, what it is like to be something, cannot be identical with any physical property, or at least any physical property which we know anything about? A trivial answer to this question would be that we can know all about something's physical properties and not know how it feels-—especially if we can’t talk to it.

>Why should this epistemic distinction reﬂect an ontological distinction? Why should the epistemic privilege we all have of being incorrigible about how things seem to us reﬂect a distinction between two realms of being? The answer presumably has to go something like this: Feelings just are appearances. Their reality is exhausted in how they seem. They are pure seemings. Anything that is not a seeming (putting the intentional to one side for the moment) is merely physical—that is, it is something which can appear other than it is.

Are our intuitions wrong? Are we not always completely seeming, swimming through a pool of air and dust? Is the only pure state the ground state of quantum mechanics-the vacuum state? We cannot think in vacuum, can we? What is thought, belief, desire, love _in vacuo_? Pain, the mental, being made of mind-stuff, or the forcing of argument to this point misunderstands what the mental is and is not. 

>The neo-dualist is no longer talking about how people feel but about feelings as little self-subsistent entities, ﬂoating free of people in the way in which universals ﬂoat free of the instantiations. He has, in fact, modeled pains on universals. It is no wonder, then, that he can "intuit” that pains can exist separately from the body, for this intuition is simply the intuition that universals can exist independently of particulars. [...] To put it oxymoronically, mental particulars, unlike mental states of people, turn out to be universals.

>Why do we think of the phenomenal as immaterial? We do so because, as Ryle put it, we insist on thinking of having a pain in ocular metaphors—as having a funny sort of par.ticular before the eye of the mind. That particular turns out to be a universal, a quality hypostatized into a subject of predication. Thus when neo-dualists say that how pains feel are essential to what pains are, and then criticize Smart for thinking of the causal role of certain neurons as what is essential to pain, they are changing the subject. Smart is talking about what is essential to people being in pain, whereas neo-dualists like Kripke are talking about what is essential for something’s being a pain. Neo-dualists feel unafraid of the question “What is the epistemological basis for your claim to know what is an essential property of pain?" for they have arranged things so that pains have only one intrinsic property—namely, feeling painful—and so the choice of which properties are to count as essential to them is obvious.

>The mental-physical distinction is parasitic on the universal-particular distinction. Further, the notion of mind-stuff as that out of which pains and beliefs are made makes exactly as much or as little sense as the notion of “that of which universals are made.”

>Following Wittgenstein, we shall treat the intentional as merely a subspecies of the functional, and the functional as merely the sort of property whose attribution depends upon a knowledge of context rather than being observable right off the bat. We shall see the intentional as having no connection with the phenomenal, and the phenomenal as a matter of how we talk.

>Just as the patient needs to relive his past to answer his questions, so philosophy needs to relive its past in order to answer its questions.

>In my Wittgensteinian view, an intuition is never anything more or less than familiarity with a language—game, so to discover the source of our intuitions is to relive the history of the philosophical language-game we ﬁnd ourselves playing.

>Let us call the “problem of personhood” that of what more a human being is than ﬂesh. This problem has one form in the pre-philosophical craving for immortality, and another in the Kantian and romantic assertion of human dignity—but both cravings are quite distinct from problems about consciousness and about knowledge.

>The problem of consciousness centers around the brain, raw feels, and bodily motions. The problem of reason centers around the topics of knowledge, language, and intelligence—all our “higher powers.” The problem of personhood centers around attributions of freedom and of moral responsibility.

>Philosophy undertook to examine the difference between knowing that there were parallel mountain ranges to the west and knowing that inﬁnitely extended parallel lines never meet, the difference between knowing that Socrates was good and knowing what goodness was. So the question arose: What are the analogies between knowing about mountains and knowing about lines, between knowing Socrates and knowing the Good? When this question was answered in terms of the distinction between the eye of the body and the Eye of the Mind, νους--thought, intellect, insight—-was identiﬁed as what separates men from beasts. There was, we moderns may say with the ingratitude of hindsight, no particular reason why this ocular metaphor seized the imagination of the founders of Western thought. But it did, and contemporary philosophers are still working out its consequences, analyzing the problems it created, and asking whether there may not be something to it after all. The notion of "contemplation,” of knowledge of universal concepts or truths as θεωρία, makes the Eye of the Mind the inescapable model for the better sort of knowledge.

>froghood  = skimming off the universal from the clearly known particular frog, so to speak

>Our Glassy Essence; It is glassy—mirror-like—for two reasons. First, it takes on new forms without being changed—but intellectual forms, rather than sensible ones as material mirrors do. Second, mirrors are made of a substance which is purer, ﬁner grained, more subtle, and more delicate than most.

>The image of our Glassy Essence remains with us, as does Isabella’s lament that we cannot grasp it. A sense of moral failure mixes with a sense of grievance that philosophy—the discipline supremely concerned with “the higher”—has not made us more aware of our own nature. That nature, it is still felt, makes its distinctive character most clearly felt in a certain sort of knowledge—knowledge of the highest and purest things: mathematics, philosophy itself, theoretical physics, anything which contemplates universals. To suggest that there are no universals—that they are ﬂatus vocis—is to endanger our uniqueness. To suggest that the mind is the brain is to suggest that we secrete theorems and symphonies as our spleen secretes dark humors.

>In Aristotle’s conception intellect is not a mirror inspected by an inner eye. It is both mirror and eye in one. The retinal image is itself the model for the “intellect which becomes all things,” whereas in the Cartesian model, the intellect inspects entities modeled on retinal images.

>The difﬁculty is in ﬁnding a Greek equivalent for “sensation” in the sense philosophers make it bear. . . . “Sensation” was introduced into philosophy precisely to make it possible to speak of a conscious state without committing oneself as to the nature or even existence of external stimuli.

>Importantly, there had been no term, even of philosophical art, in the Greek and medieval traditions coextensive with the Descartes-Locke use of “idea.”

>In Aristotle, the faculty which received universals without embodying them in matter was “separable” and it was hard (without some help from extra-philosophical concerns, such as Christianity) to say whether one should view it as 1) a special power which the body had, 2) a separate substance attached to each mature human body, or perhaps 3) a single substance which was somehow shared among as many men and angels as there happened to be. 

>Descartes will admit only three substances—thought, extension, and God.

>"argument from doubt:" what we can doubt exists cannot, by Leibniz’s law, be identical with what we cannot doubt exists. this argument is "universally recognized to be fallacious."

>If I am right in thinking that Descartes’s badly argued hunch, the one which made him able to see pains and thoughts as modes of a single substance, was that indubitability was the common factor they shared with nothing physical, then we can see him as working his way around toward a view in which indubitability is no longer the mark of eternality, but rather of something for which the Greeks had no name—consciousness.

>The Cartesian change from mind-as-reason to mind-as-inner-arena was not the triumph of the prideful individual subject freed from scholastic shackles so much as the triumph of the quest for certainty over the quest for wisdom. From that time. forward, the way was open for philosophers either to attain the rigor of the mathematician or the mathematical physicist, or to explain the appearance of rigor in these ﬁelds, rather than to help people attain peace of mind. Science, rather than living, became philosophy’s subject, and epistemology its center.

>The notion which would deﬁne what could “have a distinct existence from the body” was one which would draw a line between the cramps in one’s stomach and the associated feeling in one’s mind. I have suggested that the only criterion which will draw this line is indubitability—that closeness to the Inner Eye which permits Descartes to say that “nothing is easier for the mind to know than itself.

>It seems plausible to say that Descartes’s insight was merely a recognition of the difference between parts of persons or states of those parts (e.g., cramps of their stomachs) on the one hand and certain states of the whole person on the other, misleadingly stated in a corrupted scholastic vocabulary as a distinction of “substance.”

>My answer to the question “Why do we tend to lump the intentional and the phenomenal together as ‘the mental’?” is that Descartes used the notion of the “incorrigibly known” to bridge the gap between them. So I now need to spell out more fully my own anti-Cartesian, Wittgensteinian, view of the nature of “our privileged access to the mental.”

>I shall try to show that the purportedly metaphysical “problem of consciousness” is no more and no less than the epistemological “problem of privileged access,” and that once this is seen questions about dualism versus materialism lose their interest.

Refs: 
Richard Rorty, “Incorrigibility as the Mark of the Mental," Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970), 406-409

<br><br>

Aristotle 

>‘Hylomorphism’ is simply a compound word composed of the Greek terms for matter (hulê) and form or shape (morphê); thus one could equally describe Aristotle’s view of body and soul as an instance of his “matter-formism.” That is, when he introduces the soul as the form of the body, which in turn is said to be the matter of the soul, Aristotle treats soul-body relations as a special case of a more general relationship which obtains between the components of all generated compounds, natural or artifactual.

''''soul : body :: form : matter :: Hermes-shape : bronze''''

>Aristotle thinks that Plato and other dualists are right to stress the importance of the soul in explanations of living beings. At the same time, he sees their commitment to the separability of the soul from the body as unjustified merely by appeal to formal causation: he will allow that the soul is distinct from the body, and is indeed the actuality of the body, but he sees that these concessions by themselves provide no grounds for supposing that the soul can exist without the body. His hylomorphism, then, embraces neither reductive materialism nor Platonic dualism. Instead, it seeks to steer a middle course between these alternatives by pointing out, implicitly, and rightly, that these are not exhaustive options.

>On the one hand, he insists that because various psychological states, including anger, joy, courage, pity, loving, and hating, all involve the body in central and obvious ways, the study of soul “is already in the province of the natural scientist”. At the same time, however, he insists that the mind or intellect (nous) may not be enmeshed in the body in the same way as these sorts of states, and so denies that the study of soul falls in its entirety to the natural scientist. This is presumably why in the opening chapter of De Anima Aristotle reports a deep and authentic perplexity about the best method for investigating psychological matters. If different sciences employ different methods and the study of soul is bifurcated so that it belongs to no one science, there will indeed be a genuine difficulty about how best to proceed in any inquiry concerning it. It seems fair to say that these sorts of quandaries have not left us altogether. 

In the Wittgensteinian reformulation, the Hermes-shape is a Hermes-shape only in the context of our language game. If someone did not recognize Hermes, they might say "man-shape" in his stead, thus appealing to a more general game. Form embodies concept.

''''S thinks O if and only if: (i) S has the capacity requisite for receiving O’s intelligible form; (ii) O acts upon that capacity by enforming it; and, as a result, (iii) S’s relevant capacity becomes isomorphic with that form.''''

>Unsurprisingly, the same questions which arose in the case of perception also arise here. Most immediately, to understand Aristotle’s approach to thinking, it is necessary to determine what it means to say that a thinker’s mind and its object become isomorphic.



